vaikuṇṭha vardhitabalo'tha bhavatprasādā-
dambhojayonirasṛjat kila jīvadehān |
sthāsnūni bhūruhamayāni tathā tiraścāṃ
jātiṃ manuṣyanivahānapi devabhedān ||1||
vaikuṇṭha	O Lord of Vaikuntha loka !
vardhita-bala: -atha	(Brahmaa) whose strength had enhanced then
bhavat-prasādāt-	by Thy grace
ambhojyoni: -	the lotus born (Brahmaa)
asṛjat kila	created it is said
jīvadehān	bodies for jeevas
sthānūni	the non-moving entities (trees etc.)
bhūruhamayāni	which grow on the earth
tathā tiraścāṃ jātiṃ	and animals, birds etc.
manuṣya-nivahān-api	and also human kind
devabhedān	and various divine beings
O Lord of Vaikuntha! by Thy grace, with increased spiritual powers, Brahmaa started creation. He created varieties of beings, those that grow on earth and are non-moving like trees etc., as well as the moving, like animals birds etc., human beings and various divine beings. These serve as bodies for the jeevas to enter into.
mithyāgrahāsmimatirāgavikopabhīti-
rajñānavṛttimiti pañcavidhāṃ sa sṛṣṭvā |
uddāmatāmasapadārthavidhānadūna -
stene tvadīyacaraṇasmaraṇaṃ viśuddhyai ||2||
mithyā-āgraha-	false apprehension
asmimati-rāga-	egoism, attachment
vikopa-bhīti:-	anger and fear
ajñānavṛttim-iti	effects of ignorance, these
pañcavidhāṃ	of five kinds
sa sṛṣṭvā	Brahmaa having created
uddāma-tāmasa-padārtha-vidhān-adūna:-	and repenting for having created these extremely taamasic qualities
tene	resorted to
tvadīya-caraṇa-smaraṇaṃ	on Thy lotus feet contemplation
viśuddhyai	for self purification
Brahma then created the five-fold effects of ignorance,which are wrong apprehension, egoism, attachment, anger and fear. Having created these extremely negative qualities and repenting for doing so, he resorted to meditate on Thy lotus feet for self purification.
tāvat sasarja manasā sanakaṃ sanandaṃ
bhūya: sanātanamuniṃ ca sanatkumāram |
te sṛṣṭikarmaṇi tu tena niyujyamānā-
stvatpādabhaktirasikā jagṛhurna vāṇīm ||3||
tāvat sasarja manasā	then he created from his mind
sanakaṃ sanandaṃ	(sages) Sanaka, Sananda
bhūya: sanātanamuniṃ ca sanatkumāraṃ	also Sanaatana Muni and Sanat kumara
te sṛṣṭikarmaṇi tu	they , in the job of creation
tena niyujyamānā: -	by Brahmaa, though asked to engage
tvat-pāda-bhakti-rasikā	(these sages) who were immersed in devotion to Thy feet
jagṛhu: -na vāṇīm	did not heed (his) words
Brahmaa then from his mind created Sanaka, Sananda, Sanaatana Muni and Sanat Kumaras.Even though they were directed by Brahmaa to engage in the work of creation, they did not heed his words because they were highly devoted to Thy feet.
tāvat prakopamuditaṃ pratirundhato'sya
bhrūmadhyato'jani mṛḍo bhavadekadeśa: |
nāmāni me kuru padāni ca hā viriñce-
tyādau ruroda kila tena sa rudranāmā ||4||
tāvat	then
prakopam-uditaṃ	the anger which arose in him
pratirundhata: -	and who was suppressing it
asya bhrūmadhyata: -	from his (Brahmaa's) middle of the eyebrows
ajani mṛḍa:	was born Mrida
bhavat-eka-deśa:	who was a part incarnation of Thine
nāmāni me kuru	provide me with names
padāni ca	and abodes
hā viriñca-	O Brahmaa
iti-ādau ruroda	thus at once he cried out
kila tena sa rudranāmā	because of that he came to be known as Rudra
A great anger arose in Brahma, because he was refused his bidding by his mental sons, which he tried to suppress. This caused the birth of Mrida from between his eyebrows, who is a part incarnation of Thine. Mrida at once cried out and told Brahmaa to provide him with names and abodes. Thus Mrida came to be known as Rudra.
ekādaśāhvayatayā ca vibhinnarūpaṃ
rudraṃ vidhāya dayitā vanitāśca datvā |
tāvantyadatta ca padāni bhavatpraṇunna:
prāha prajāviracanāya ca sādaraṃ tam ||5||
ekādaśa-āhvayatayā	with eleven names
ca vibhinna-rūpaṃ	and different forms
rudraṃ vidhāya	to Rudra giving
dayitā: vanitā: -ca datvā	and also giving eleven dear wives
tāvanti-adatta ca padāni	and as many abodes were also given
bhavat-praṇunna:	(then) impelled by Thee
prāha prajā-viracanāya	(Brahmaa) requested for the creation of beings
ca sādaraṃ tam	to him (Rudra) humbly
Brahmaa then prompted by Thee, gave Rudra eleven names, forms, abodes and as many wives and humbly requested him to help in the creative process.
rudrābhisṛṣṭabhayadākṛtirudrasaṃgha-
sampūryamāṇabhuvanatrayabhītacetā: |
mā mā prajā: sṛja tapaścara maṅgalāye-
tyācaṣṭa taṃ kamalabhūrbhavadīritātmā ||6||
rudra-abhisṛṣṭa-	Rudra's creation
bhayada-ākṛti-rudrasaṃgha-	(consisting) of fierce looking hosts of Rudraas
sampūryamāṇa-bhuvanatraya-	filling up the three worlds
bhīta-cetā:	and getting frightened by them
mā mā prajā: sṛja	(Brahmaa said) do not, do not procreate any more beings
tapa: -cara	do penance
maṅglāya-	for the welfare (of the world)
iti-ācaṣṭa taṃ kamalabhū: -	thus said the lotus born Brahmaa to him
bhavata-īritātmā	by Thee being prompted from within
Rudraa's creation consisted of fierce looking Rudras,which were filling up the three worlds. Brahmaa was frightened by them, and from within being prompted by Thee, told Rudra not to create any more beings, and asked him to do penance for the benefit of the world.
tasyātha sargarasikasya marīciratri-
statrāṅigarā: kratumuni: pulaha: pulastya: |
aṅgādajāyata bhṛguśca vasiṣṭhadakṣau
śrīnāradaśca bhagavan bhavadaṃghridāsa: ||7||
tasya-atha	thereafter, from him (Brahmaa)
sarga-rasikasya	who was intent on creation
marīci: -atri: -	Mareechi, Atri
tatra-aṅigarā:	and also Angiraas
kratumuni: pulaha: pulastya:	Kratumuni, Pulaha, Pulastya
aṅgāt-ajāyata	from his body were born
bhṛgu:-ca vasiṣṭha-dakṣau	also Bhrigu, Vasishtha and Dakshas
śrī-nārada: -ca	and Shri Naarada
bhagavan	O Lord!
bhavat-aṃghri-dāsa:	who is devoted to Thy lotus feet
Brahmaa, who was intent on creation, from his own body created (the sages) Mareechi, Atri, Angiraas, Kratumuni, Pulaha, Pulastya, Bhrigu, Vasishtha, the Dakshas and also Shri Naarada, who is a devotee of Thy lotus feet.
dharmādikānabhisṛjannatha kardamaṃ ca
vāṇīṃ vidhāya vidhiraṅgajasaṃkulo'bhūt |
tvadbodhitaissanakadakṣamukhaistanūjai-
rudbodhitaśca virarāma tamo vimuñcan ||8||
dharma-ādikān-abhisṛjan-	Dharmadevas and others having created
atha kardamaṃ ca	and also Kardama
vāṇīṃ vidhāya	then after creating Saraswati
vidhi: -	Brahmaa
aṅgaja-saṃkula: -abhūt	was afflicted by desire
tvat-bodhitai: -	(then) prompted by Thee
sanaka-dakṣa-mukhai: -	by Sanaka, Daksha and others
tanūjai:-udbodhita: -ca	by his own sons enlightened
virarāma	refrained
tama: vimuñcan	and gave up ignorance
Brahmaa further created Dharmadeva, sage Kardama and then Saraswati. He was then overcome with desire for her, his own creation. However, prompted by Thee, Sanaka Daksha and his other sons enlightened him and he gave up desire, being disillusioned.
vedān purāṇanivahānapi sarvavidyā:
kurvan nijānanagaṇāccaturānano'sau |
putreṣu teṣu vinidhāya sa sargavṛddhi-
maprāpnuvaṃstava padāmbujamāśritobhūt ||9||
vedān purāṇa-nivahān-	the Vedas and all the Puraanas
api sarva-vidyā:	also all the other branches of learning
kurvan nija-ānana-gaṇāt-	bringing out from all his faces
catu:-ānana-asau	that four faced (Brahmaa)
putreṣu teṣu vinidhāya	to his those sons having imparted
sa sarga-vṛddhim-aprāpnuvan-	and he unable to further the creation
tava padāmbujam-āśrita: - abhūt	at Thy lotus feet took refuge
Brahmaa then brought out the Vedas and all the Puraanas and all the other branches of learning, from his four faces and taught them to his sons. He then found himself unable to further the process of creation and so he took refuge at Thy lotus feet.
jānannupāyamatha dehamajo vibhajya
srīpuṃsabhāvamabhajanmanutadvadhūbhyām |
tābhyāṃ ca mānuṣakulāni vivardhayaṃstvaṃ
govinda mārutapureśa nirundhi rogān ||10||
jānan-upāyam-atha	knowing the technique then
deham-aja: vibhajya	Brahmaa, dividing his body into two
strī-puṃsa-bhāvam-abhajat-	assumed the forms of female and male
manu-tat-vadhūbhyām	as Manu and his wife (Shataroopaa)
tābhyāṃ ca	through them
mānuṣa-kulāni vivardhayan-	then multiplying the human race
tvaṃ govind mārutapureśa	Thou O Govind! Lord of Guruvaayur!
nirundhi rogān	(kindly) eradicate my ailments
Then prompted by Thee and knowing the technique Brahmaa, from the two sides of his body created the male and the female, named Manu and his wife Shataroopa. Through them he then multiplied the human race. Thou O Govinda! Lord of Guruvaayur! kindly eradicate my ailments.